Welcome my friend to today's
lecture on nonverbal reasoning.
Let's decode this concept like detectives.
Concept explanation.
So what is this nonverbal
reasoning you ask?
It's like being a detective, but instead
of clues in words, you get pictures.
It is a branch of reasoning that
involves understanding and interpreting
information presented in the form
of figures, diagrams, patterns, and
images rather than words or numbers.
It tests your ability
to analyze visual data.
Identify relationships, recognize
patterns, and solve problems without
relying on linguistic or numerical skills.
This section assesses your spatial
reasoning, logical deduction,
and analytical abilities
through purely visual means.
Real world relevance and don't
think this is just for your exam.
Oh, no.
Nonverbal reasoning skills are crucial
because they enhance the ability to
quickly grasp complex visual data and
identify underlying patterns in financial
reports or operational diagrams.
These skills are vital for accurate
decision making and efficient problem
solving in a fast-paced environment.
Breakdown of question types
based on patterns in past papers.
Some question types are more popular
than your favorite movie star.
First, we have figure series
completion, identifying the next
figure in a given sequence, and this
makes up about 25 to 30% of questions.
Then there's figure analogy, finding a
similar relationship between two pairs
of figures, which is roughly 15 to 20%.
Next is figure classification or the
classic odd one out where you identify the
figure that does not belong to a group.
Also, around 15 to 20%.
We also have embedded figures, which
is like locating a hidden figure
within a complex design, making up
about 10 to 15%, and who can forget?
Paper folding and cutting, where you must
visualize the unfolded pattern of a folded
and cut paper, also around 10 to 15%.
Finally, there's mirror and water
images determining the reflection
of a figure in a mirror or water,
which comes in at about five to 10%.
Formulas and tricks.
Now, forget complicated mathematical
formulas, my friend in this game.
Your best tools are keen observation
and a logical mind, but here
are some key tricks for you.
First, always observe if figures are
undergoing rotation, either clockwise or
anti-clockwise, and by how many degrees.
Maybe 45, 90, or 180.
Next, track the movement of
individual elements within a figure,
like an arrow moving, one step
or a dot, shifting its position.
Also be a detective and identify
if elements are being added,
removed, or changing in number.
Which is the addition removal trick.
Notice changes in shading or
pattern change like crosshatching
or internal patterns.
Look for alterations in the size or
shape of figures or their components,
which we call a size, shape change.
And finally, always check for symmetry
or the lack of it in the figures.
Methods of solving.
So how do we tackle
these different beasts?
Here are some general methods
for series completion.
You must analyze the progression
from one figure to the next.
Look for consistent changes in position,
orientation, size, or number of elements.
Once you identify the rule
governing the sequence, apply
it to find the missing figure.
For analogy, your job is to determine
the exact relationship between the
first pair of figures like rotation,
inversion, or a component change.
Then you apply that same
relationship to the third figure.
To find the fourth for classification,
you must examine all the given figures
to find a common characteristic
or pattern shared by most of them.
The figure that does not share this
characteristic is the odd one out.
For embedded figures, you have to
mentally rotate or manipulate the given
simple figure to see if it fits exactly
into any part of the complex figure.
Focus on its distinct features
for paper folding and cutting.
Imagine the paper being
folded step by step.
Then visualize the cuts.
Finally, mentally unfold the paper layer
by layer, mirroring the cuts at each
fold line to find the final pattern.
For mirror and water images,
the method is simple.
For mirror images, imagine a vertical line
and reverse the figure horizontally for
water images, imagine a horizontal line
and reverse the figure vertically with
the top becoming bottom and vice versa.
Shortcuts and smart techniques
want to solve these even faster.
Of course you do.
So here are some smart techniques.
Use elimination to quickly get rid
of options that are clearly incorrect
based on a single obvious difference.
If a figure has many elements focus
on one element at a time, like
only the arrow, then only the.to
simplify finding the pattern.
Sometimes the pattern is just about
an increasing or decreasing number
of things, so count elements.
Pay attention to elements at the edge.
Cases like corners, as their
movement often reveals the pattern.
A quick symmetry check can be a
lifesaver for mirror or water images.
If a figure is symmetrical
along the axis of reflection,
its image will be identical.
And most importantly, my friend,
you must practice visualization
regularly, practice mentally rotating,
folding, and manipulating figures
to improve your spatial reasoning.
Speed.
Common mistakes and misconceptions.
Now, let's talk about the
common traps people fall into.
Don't be that person.
A big one is overlooking subtle changes
like missing small changes in shading
line thickness or the order of elements.
Another is incorrect rotation, mixing
up clockwise with anti-clockwise or
misjudging the degree of rotation.
Some people make the mistake of ignoring
all elements, focusing on only one part
of a complex figure when the pattern
involves multiple interacting parts.
A classic blunder is mirror
versus water image confusion.
Don't apply horizontal reflection
for water images or vertical
reflection for mirror images.
Also don't be fooled by
assuming simple patterns.
Sometimes the logic can be multi-layered
or involve two simultaneous changes.
And please avoid rushing paper,
folding, not visualizing each fold
and cut step by step will definitely
lead to errors in unfolding.
W Edge Framework Summary.
So to quickly summarize
everything in a neat package,
let's use the W Edge framework.
What is it?
Nonverbal reasoning is simply problem
solving using visual patterns and figures.
Why do we learn it?
It assesses your logical, analytical
and spatial reasoning skills, which
are crucial for problem solving.
When is it applied?
You'll find it in competitive exams,
cognitive assessments, and any job
requiring visual data analysis.
Where is it used in the real world?
It's used in operations for
data visualization, security
analysis, and process optimization.
Who is this for?
Any friend like you.
Job aspirants, professionals in
analytical roles and anyone who needs
to interpret visual information.
And finally, how do we master it?
By observing changes, identifying
patterns, applying logical rules,
and visualizing transformations
of figures fully worked out.
Examples.
All right, enough theory.
Let's get our hands
dirty with some examples.
Example, one figure series
completion question, which
figure will complete the series?
Problem figures are a
square with a small circle.
Moving from top left to top, right
to bottom, right to bottom left.
Here are your options.
A a square with a small circle in
the top left corner, BA square with a
small circle in the top right corner.
CA square with a small circle
in the bottom right corner.
DA square with a small circle in the top
left corner, but the circle is shaded.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Let's solve this.
Step one, we analyze the pattern.
We observe the movement of the
small circle inside the square.
In figure one, it's top left in two.
Top right in three, bottom right,
and in four, it's at the bottom left.
Step two, identify the rule.
It's quite clear, isn't it?
The small circle is moving clockwise
from one corner to the next.
It's making a full tour
of the square corners.
Step three, apply the rule
to find the next figure.
After the bottom left corner in
figure four, the next clockwise
stop is back to the top left corner.
Step four, compare with options.
Option A shows exactly that.
Option D tries to trick us with a
shaded circle, a new element, not
part of our established pattern.
So the correct answer is a
example two figure analogy.
Question, select the figure from the
options that has the same relationship
with the third figure as the first two
figures have, the problem is a large
circle with a small square inside is two,
a large square with a small circle inside.
So a large triangle with a
small star inside is two.
What options?
A, a large star with a
small triangle inside.
B, a large triangle with a
small star inside, but inverted.
C, a large circle with a star inside
D, a large star with a circle inside.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Let's break it down.
Step one, analyze the relationship.
In the first pair, a large circle with
a small square inside transforms into a
large square with a small circle inside.
The outer shape becomes the
inner shape, and the inner
shape becomes the outer shape.
They just swapped places.
Step two, apply the same
relationship to the third figure.
The third figure is a large
triangle with a small star inside.
Following our rule, the outer triangle
should go inside and the inner star
should become the big outer shape.
So the resulting figure should be a
large star with a small triangle inside.
Step three, compare with options.
Option A shows a large star with
a small triangle inside, which
perfectly matches our derived figure.
The correct answer is a
example, three embedded figures.
Question.
Find out which of the answer
figures contains the problem
figure, which is a simple Z shape.
Answer figures are.
A, a complex geometric pattern
with many lines, but no clear zed.
B, a pattern resembling a staircase
where a Zed shape can be traced.
C, a figure made of curved lines with
no zed DA grid of squares with no Zed.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Let's hunt for the Zed.
Step one, understand the
problem, figure the problem.
Figure X is a simple Zed shape.
We need to find this exact Zed
shape embedded within one of
the complex answer figures.
The Zed can be rotated.
Step two, we examine each answer.
Figure carefully, figure a. No
clear Zed shape can be identified.
Figure B, look closely
at the staircase pattern.
You can identify a Z shape formed by
a horizontal line, a diagonal line,
and another horizontal line figure C.
This figure consists of only curved
lines, so a Zed cannot be present.
Figure D. This is a grid of squares,
so an isolated Zed shape is not there.
Step three, confirm the embedded figure.
The Zed shape is clearly visible
within figure B. Correct answer.
B. Thank you.
See you in the next lecture.